# celestial-object-classification
#### Multi-class classification of astronomical objects into **Stars, Galaxies or Quasars**,
#### based on spectroscopic & photometric features made available as a tabular dataset.
## **Problem Context**

The detection of celestial objects observed through telescopes as being either a star, a galaxy or a quasar, is an important classification scheme in astronomy. Stars have been known to humanity since time immemorial, but the idea of the existence of whole galaxies of stars outside our own galaxy (The Milky Way), was first theorized by the philosopher Immanuel Kant in 1755, and conclusively observed in 1925 by the American astronomer Edwin Hubble. Quasars have been a more recent discovery made possible significantly by the emergence of radio astronomy in the 1950s.

Descriptions of these three celestial objects are provided below:
- **Star:** A star is an astronomical object consisting of a luminous plasma spheroid held together by the force of its own gravity. The nuclear fusion reactions taking place at a star's core are exoergic (there is a net release of energy) and are hence responsible for the light emitted by the star. The closest star to Earth is, of course, the Sun. The next nearest star is Proxima Centauri, which is around 4.25 light years away (a light year refers to the unit of distance travelled by light in one year, around 9.46 trillion kilometers). Several stars are visible to us in the night sky, however they are so far away they appear as mere points of light to us here on Earth. There are an estimated 10<sup>22</sup> to 10<sup>24</sup> stars in the observable universe, but the only ones visible to the unaided eye are those in the Milky Way, our home galaxy.

- **Galaxy:** Galaxies are gravitationally bound groupings or systems of stars that additionally contain other matter such as stellar remnants, interstellar gas, cosmic dust and even dark matter. Galaxies may contain anywhere between the order of 10<sup>8</sup> to 10<sup>14</sup> stars, which orbit the center of mass of the galaxy.

- **Quasar:** Quasars, also called Quasi-stellar objects (abbv. QSO) are a kind of highly luminous "Active Galactic Nucleus". Quasars emit an enormous amount of energy, because they have supermassive black holes at their center. (A black hole is an astronomical object whose gravitational pull is so strong that not even light can escape from it if closer than a certain distance from it) The gravitational pull of the black holes causes gas to spiral and fall into "accretion discs" around the black hole, hence emitting energy in the form of electromagnetic radiation.

Quasars were understood to be different from other stars and galaxies, because their spectral measurements (which indicated their chemical composition) and their luminosity changes were strange and initially defied explanation based on conventional knowledge - they were observed to be far more luminous than galaxies, but also far more compact, indicating tremendous power density. However, also crucially, it was the extreme "redshift" observed in the spectral readings of Quasars that stood out and gave rise to the realization that they were separate entities from other, less luminous stars and galaxies.
